# General principles

In order to apply a consistent methodology to the sourcing and disaggregation of data to the local level, a range of principles have been established. These principles guide both the sourcing of the data, and the appropriate methodology used.

The general principles are:
 - **Local data first:** where data already exists at a lower geographic level than national, that dataset is preferable. The lower the geographic level of the data, the more likely they are to be used. This may mean, for example, that data on local authority or regional tax or expenditure are used in place of UK-wide data. No expenditure or tax data are used or provided at a level lower than local authority. However, some disaggregation methodologies do utilise LSOA population data to disaggregate expenditure to a local authority level.
 - **Larger datasets:** datasets covering larger geographies or multiple themes are chosen above more complex or detailed datasets that may only cover one element of the overall data. This is to help maintain consistency across a wide variety of data.
 - **Fewer datasets:** to limit the number of datasets from which data are drawn to calculate relevant information. The most complicated calculations and disaggregations increase the likelihood of inaccuracies and lack of comparability.
 - **National or government statistics above independently produced data:** while independently produced statistics may provide further insight, or reduce the likelihood for miscalculations, it was felt that to ensure consistency, national statistics or government-provided data would be a better choice.
 - **Reported financial figures above independent estimates:** where national figures are not available, financial figures reported by the relevant organisation are preferable over independently produced figures.
 - **Appropriate disaggregation denominators:** appropriate disaggregation denominators have been chosen to support a more accurate view of the data. For many areas, a simple disaggregation of national tax or expenditure would be by population. And yet many taxes are not collected on a per person basis, while most public sector expenditure is not based on the total population of an area. As a result, appropriate methodologies for disaggregating national, regional or non-district data down to the district are chosen above a standard disaggregation by population.
 - **Removing accounting practices from reported figures:** several datasets, especially around financial estimates of expenditure, include financial accounting adjustments that do not represent real changes in expenditure. For example, as the fire services came together in Scotland, Fire Scotland reported a significant expenditure in the first year as an adjustment identifying legacy liabilities. This adjustment - referencing the shifting of premises and pensions liabilities constituted about 4 years' worth of annual revenue expenditure. It was thus removed from the expenditure figures.
 - **Balancing availability and accuracy:** one of the primary concerns is in balancing accuracy of information and disaggregations with the availability of data as a whole. Tax data, for example, are provided at a UK and nation level - we have taken the nation level, accepting the HMRC breakdown of tax receipts by nation rather than calculating a breakdown based on other models.
 - **Accounting for spend by the agency directly expending the monies:** there are several examples within the data where there have been intra-agency payments. As an example, funding for Transport for Greater Manchester is initially provided to the Greater Manchester Combined Authority and then passed on. The approach taken here is to identify the organisation that spends the public funding, and the geography at which they spend it. This also aims to avoid double-counting, where two organisations report the same funding within their accounts.
 - **Final data above reported budgets:** the analysis has used outturn data first, utilising budget data only where this information is unavailable. This ensures greater accuracy in terms of overall spend.
 - **Net current expenditure rather than gross:** only one expenditure figure is provided: net current expenditure. The various datasets include both income and gross expenditure figures. However, to provide a more accurate estimation of the reliance of an area on HM Treasury, net current expenditure is the only figure reported.
 - **Identifying both revenue and capital expenditure:** the ESPRESSO tool includes breakdowns for both capital and revenue expenditure, in order to provide options for a more fine-grain analysis of the data.

A more general approach has been to differentiate public sector expenditure between direct expenditure on public service delivery and national spend that does not have a specific geographic focus. This highlights a specific caveat to the use of the data: much of the national spend is still geographically focused (e.g. Whitehall expenditure in central government functions, MoJ expenditure at specific court locations, MoD expenditure at specific military bases).

The analysis has summed all national government expenditure and then disaggregated down to the local level. As more data become available, the ESPRESSO tool will be expanded to consider how national government expenditure can be geographically disaggregated.
